Update navigation API article (#3390)
GoogleChrome/developer.chrome.com: site/en/docs/web-platform/navigation-api/index.md

A `NavigateEvent` is passed to the `"navigate"` listener which contains information about the navigation, such as the destination URL, and allows you to respond to the navigation in one centralized place.
A basic `"navigate"` listener could look like this:

```js
navigation.addEventListener('navigate', navigateEvent => {
  // Exit early if this navigation shouldn't be intercepted.
  // The properties to look at are discussed later in the article.
  if (shouldNotIntercept(navigateEvent)) return;

  const url = new URL(navigateEvent.destination.url);

  if (url.pathname === '/') {
    navigateEvent.intercept({handler: loadIndexPage});
  } else if (url.pathname === '/cats/') {
    navigateEvent.intercept({handler: loadCatsPage});
  }
});
```

You can deal with the navigation in one of two ways:

- Calling `intercept({ handler })` (as described above) to handle the navigation.
- Calling `preventDefault()`, which can cancel the navigation completely.

{% Aside %}
An earlier version of this API used `navigateEvent.transitionWhile(promise)` rather than `navigateEvent.intercept({ handler })`.

> `intercept` landed in Chrome 105.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`intercept` is available from Chrome 105.
```

`transitionWhile` is deprecated, and will be removed in Chrome 108.
{% endAside %}

> This example calls `intecept()` on the event.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example calls `intercept()` on the event.
```

Author: oh wow, good catch

For SPAs, that likely means keeping the user on the same page and loading or changing the site's content.

A `NavigateEvent` is passed to the "navigate" listener which contains information about the navigation, such as the destination URL, and allows you to respond to the navigation in one centralized place.
A basic "navigate" listener could look like this:

```js
navigation.addEventListener('navigate', navigateEvent => {

>   const url = new URL(navigateEvent.destination.url);

Reviewer 2: Maybe move this below the early bail-out.

Author: hah, yeah. I was passing it into `shouldNotIntercept` in an earlier draft.

  // Exit early if this navigation shouldn't be intercepted.
  // The properties to look at are discussed later in the article.
  if (shouldNotIntercept(navigateEvent)) return;

  if (url.pathname === '/') {
    navigateEvent.intercept({handler: loadIndexPage});
  } else if (url.pathname === '/cats/') {
    navigateEvent.intercept({handler: loadCatsPage});
  }
});
```

> You can intercept the navigation in one of two ways:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can deal with the navigation in one of two ways:
```

or similar?

- Calling `intercept({ handler })` (as described above) to handle the navigation.
- Calling `preventDefault()`, which can cancel the navigation completely.

{% Aside %}
An earlier version of this API used `navigateEvent.transitionWhile(promise)` rather than `navigateEvent.intercept({ handler })`.

`intercept` landed in Chrome 105.
`transitionWhile` is deprecated, and will be removed in Chrome 108.
{% endAside %}

> This example calls `intecept()` on the event with a promise generated from an async function.

Reviewer 2: Doesn't seem like a correct sentence anymore.

E.g., they may submit a form or even use an [image map].
Your page might deal with these, but there's a long tail of possibilities which could just be simplified—something that the new Navigation API achieves.

> Additionally, the above doesn't handle back/forward navigation. There's another event for that, `"popstate"`.

Reviewer 2: Events in this article seem to be without code font (e.g. lots of instances of "navigate", not `"navigate"`).

Author: I'll make them all use code font

Personally, the History API often _feels_ like it could go some way to help with these possibilities.
However, it really only has two surface areas: responding if the user presses Back or Forward in their browser, plus pushing and replacing URLs.
It doesn't have an analogy to "navigate", except if you manually set up listeners for, e.g., click events, as demonstrated above.

## Deciding how to handle a navigation

> The `navigateEvent` contains a lot of information about the navigation that you can use to decide whether to intercept a particular navigation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `navigateEvent` contains a lot of information about the navigation that you can use to decide how to deal with a particular navigation.
```

maybe? Since this is also about whether you want to cancel.

The key properties are:

`canIntercept`
: If this is false, you can't intercept the navigation.

> Cross-origin navigations, and cross-document traversals cannot be intercepted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cross-origin navigations and cross-document traversals cannot be intercepted.
```

`destination.url`
: Probably the most important piece of information to consider when handling the navigation.

`hashChange`
: True if the navigation is same-document, and the hash is the only part of the URL that's different to the current URL.
In modern SPAs, the hash should be for linking to different parts of the current document. So, if `hashChange` is true, you probably don't need to intercept this navigation.

`downloadRequest`
: If this is true, the navigation was initiated by a link with a `download` attribute.
In most cases, you don't need to intercept this.

`formData`
: If this isn't null, then this navigation is part of a POST form submission.
Make sure you take this into account when handling the navigation.

> If you only want to handle GET navigations, avoid intercepting navigations where `formData` is not null.

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention that actually intercepting this is pretty common, to progressively enhance `<form>` submissions into Ajax? Forward-link to the `#form-submissions` heading?

Author: Shall do. Although, I wonder how many folks will do this vs handle the form as they do today, then perform a replacement navigation when the POST is complete.

`navigationType`
: This is one of `"reload"`, `"push"`, `"replace"`, or `"traverse"`.
If it's `"traverse"`, then this navigation cannot be cancelled via `preventDefault()`.

For example, the `shouldNotIntercept` function used in the first example could be something like this:

```js
function shouldNotIntercept(navigationEvent) {
  return (
    !navigationEvent.canIntercept ||
    // If this is just a hashChange,
    // just let the browser handle scrolling to the content.
    navigationEvent.hashChange ||
    // If this is a download,
    // let the browser perform the download.
    navigationEvent.downloadRequest ||
    // If this is a form submission,
    // let that go to the server.
    navigationEvent.formData
  );
}
```

## Intercepting

> When your code calls `intercept({ handler })` from within its "navigate" listener, it informs the browser that it's now preparing the page for the new, updated state; and that the navigation may take some time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When your code calls `intercept({ handler })` from within its "navigate" listener, it informs the browser that it's now preparing the page for the new, updated state, and that the navigation may take some time.
```

If you don't update the DOM immediately, this creates a period where the old content is displayed along with the new URL.
This impacts things like relative URL resolution when fetching data or loading new subresources.

A way to delay the URL change is being [discussed on GitHub](https://github.com/WICG/navigation-api/issues/66), but it's generally recommended to immediately update the page with some sort of placeholder for the incoming content:

```js
navigation.addEventListener('navigate', navigateEvent => {
  const url = new URL(navigateEvent.destination.url);
  if (shouldNotIntercept(navigateEvent)) return;

  if (url.pathname.startsWith('/articles/')) {
    navigateEvent.intercept({
      async handler() {
        // The URL has already changed, so quickly show a placeholder.
        renderArticlePagePlaceholder();
        // Then fetch the real data.
        const articleContent = await getArticleContent(url.pathname);
        renderArticlePage(articleContent);
      },
    });
  }
});
```

This not only avoids URL resolution issues, it also feels fast because you're instantly responding to the user.

> ### Abort Signals

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Abort signals
```

This will both save the user's bandwidth, and reject the `Promise` returned by `fetch()`, preventing any following code from e.g., updating the DOM to show a now invalid page navigation.

Here's the previous example, but with `getArticleContent` inlined, showing how the `AbortSignal` can be used with `fetch()`:

```js
navigation.addEventListener('navigate', navigateEvent => {
  const url = new URL(navigateEvent.destination.url);
  if (shouldNotIntercept(navigateEvent)) return;

  if (url.pathname.startsWith('/articles/')) {
    navigateEvent.intercept({
      async handler() {
        // The URL has already changed, so quickly show a placeholder.
        renderArticlePagePlaceholder();
        // Then fetch the real data.
        const articleContentURL = new URL(
          '/get-article-content',
          location.href
        );
        articleContentURL.searchParams.set('path', url.pathname);
        const response = await fetch(articleContentURL, {
          signal: navigateEvent.signal,
        });
        const articleContent = await response.json();
        renderArticlePage(articleContent);
      },
    });
  }
});
```

### Scroll handling

> By default, the browser will attempt to handle scrolling automatically.

Reviewer 2: Maybe mention that this only happens if you call `intercept()`? Otherwise you get today's current behavior with no delays and such.

E.g., they may submit a form or even use an [image map].
Your page might deal with these, but there's a long tail of possibilities which could just be simplified—something that the new Navigation API achieves.

Additionally, the above doesn't handle back/forward navigation. There's another event for that, `"popstate"`.

Personally, the History API often _feels_ like it could go some way to help with these possibilities.
However, it really only has two surface areas: responding if the user presses Back or Forward in their browser, plus pushing and replacing URLs.

> It doesn't have an analogy to `"navigate"`, except if you manually set up listeners for, e.g., click events, as demonstrated above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It doesn't have an analogy to `"navigate"`, except if you manually set up listeners for click events for example, as demonstrated above.
```

Reviewer: docs style guide suggests not using e.g. or i.e.

        renderArticlePagePlaceholder();
        // Then fetch the real data.
        const articleContent = await getArticleContent(url.pathname);
        renderArticlePage(articleContent);
      },
    });
  }
});
```

This not only avoids URL resolution issues, it also feels fast because you're instantly responding to the user.

### Abort signals

Since you're able to do asynchronous work in an `intercept()` handler, it's possible for the navigation to become redundant.
This happens when:

- The user clicks another link, or some code performs another navigation.
  In this case the old navigation is abandoned in favour of the new navigation.
- The user clicks the 'stop' button in the browser.

To deal with any of these possibilities, the event passed to the `"navigate"` listener contains a `signal` property, which is an `AbortSignal`.
For more information see [Abortable fetch][abortable-fetch].

The short version is it basically provides an object that fires an event when you should stop your work.
Notably, you can pass an `AbortSignal` to any calls you make to `fetch()`, which will cancel in-flight network requests if the navigation is preempted.

> This will both save the user's bandwidth, and reject the `Promise` returned by `fetch()`, preventing any following code from e.g., updating the DOM to show a now invalid page navigation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will both save the user's bandwidth, and reject the `Promise` returned by `fetch()`, preventing any following code from actions such as updating the DOM to show a now invalid page navigation.
```

```js
navigation.navigate(url, {state: newState});
// Or:
navigation.reload({state: newState});
```

Where `newState` can be any [clonable object](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/API/Web_Workers_API/Structured_clone_algorithm#supported_types).

If you want to update the state of the current entry, it's best to perform a navigation that replaces the current entry:

```js
navigation.navigate(location.href, {state: newState, history: 'replace'});
```

Then, your `"navigate"` event listener can pick up this change via `navigateEvent.destination`:

```js
navigation.addEventListener('navigate', navigateEvent => {
  console.log(navigateEvent.destination.getState());
});
```

{% Aside %}
It's also possible to synchronously update state without triggering a navigation, using `updateCurrentEntry()`:

```js
navigation.updateCurrentEntry({state: newState});
```

Then, other code can hear about this change via the `"currententrychange"` event:

```js
navigation.addEventListener('currententrychange', () => {
  console.log(navigation.currentEntry.getState());
});
```

However, this splits your state-handing code between the `"navigate"` event and the `"currententrychange"` event.

> It's generally better to handle state in one place, the `"navigate"` event.

Reviewer 2: I appreciate the deemphasis on updateCurrentEntry(). However I hesitate a bit to leave this section without mentioning the react-to vs. initiate distinction that https://github.com/wicg/navigation-api#setting-the-current-entrys-state-without-navigating mentions. I'm not sure how to do that without expanding the section and thus perhaps overemphasizing updateCurrentEntry()... maybe just an explainer link?

Author: I'll work it into a new section but with caveats

    height="320",
    muted="true" %}
  <figcaption>

>     <a href="https://gigantic-honored-octagon.glitch.me/" target="_blank">Demo of opening from left or right</a>

Reviewer 2: Not sure this should be changed, now it doesn't match the gif? Hmm.

Author: oof, good catch, I pulled the wrong URL from my clipboard. It's supposed to be the same demo but updated for the latest API https://chief-low-specialist.glitch.me/. I'll update it.

    // you can't intercept this request, although you could
    // likely still call .preventDefault() to stop it completely).

>     navigateEvent.intercept({

Reviewer 2: There's a leftover canTransition above this.
